# Genome in 3D and beyond: next of the next-generation sequencing technologies

An overview presentation of chromatin conformation capture technologies and analysis methods.

## Abstract

Sequencing of the human genome provides a wealth of knowledge about genome regulation. However, the genome is much more than a linear sequence of nucleotides comprising DNA. The recent development of genome sequencing methods gave rise to chromatin conformation capture technologies such as Hi-C able to measure the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the genome. They revealed the well-organized fractal globule-like folding of the genome, the presence of chromosome territories, the formation of isolated units of genomic interactions termed Topologically Associated Domains and chromatin loops. These 3D structures proved to be indispensable for orchestrating numerous genomic processes. Changes in the 3D structure of the genome are emerging as hallmarks of cancer and other diseases. Besides 3D structure, Hi-C technologies are used for the de novo genome assembly and in metagenomics. This presentation will review chromatin conformation capture technologies and methods for analyzing the 3D structure of the genome. 

## References

- Belton, Jon-Matthew, Rachel Patton McCord, Johan Harmen Gibcus, Natalia Naumova, Ye Zhan, and Job Dekker. “Hi-C: A Comprehensive Technique to Capture the Conformation of Genomes.” Methods (San Diego, Calif.) 58, no. 3 (November 2012): 268–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.05.001. - Hi-C protocol. Biases. Matrix balancing works as well as Yaffe and Tanay protocol. Power law.

- Han, Zhijun, and Gang Wei. “Computational Tools for Hi-C Data Analysis.” Quantitative Biology, July 29, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40484-017-0113-6. - All practical aspects and tools for Hi-C data processing, from mapping, pairing, filtering, binning, to TAD calling methods, visualization. Brief description of each tool for processing, normalization, TAD calling (Table 1) and algorithm.

- Hu, Ming, Ke Deng, Zhaohui Qin, and Jun S. Liu. “Understanding Spatial Organizations of Chromosomes via Statistical Analysis of Hi-C Data.” Quantitative Biology (Beijing, China) 1, no. 2 (June 2013): 156–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40484-013-0016-0. - Classical review of the role of the 3D genome structure in health and disease (cancer), technologies, studies, and analysis techniques. Detailed protocol, alignment, filtering steps. Sparsity of the data, bias. "Correction" and "normalization" methods. Improvement in reproducibility after normalization, A/B compartments, TADs, epigenomic elements at TAD boundaries, tools for TAD boundary detection, modeling of the 3D structure. Table 1 - categorized tools.

- Lajoie, Bryan R., Job Dekker, and Noam Kaplan. “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Hi-C Analysis: Practical Guidelines.” Methods (San Diego, Calif.) 72 (January 15, 2015): 65–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.10.031. - Hi-C techniques review. Technology, ~100 million valid junctions is sufficient for 40kb data resolution. Paired-end sequencing and single-end alignment. Iterative mapping approach. Matrix normalization, balancing, Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm. Power law decay of interaction frequency with distance. TAD identification - Dixon directionality index and sliding window.

- Servant, Nicolas, Nelle Varoquaux, Bryan R. Lajoie, Eric Viara, Chong-Jian Chen, Jean-Philippe Vert, Edith Heard, Job Dekker, and Emmanuel Barillot. “HiC-Pro: An Optimized and Flexible Pipeline for Hi-C Data Processing.” Genome Biology 16 (December 1, 2015): 259. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0831-x. - HiC pipeline, references to other pipelines, comparison. From raw reads to normalized matrices. Normalization methods, fast and memory-efficient implementation of iterative correction normalization (ICE). Data format. Using genotyping information to phase contact maps. https://github.com/nservant/HiC-Pro

- Wingett, Steven, Philip Ewels, Mayra Furlan-Magaril, Takashi Nagano, Stefan Schoenfelder, Peter Fraser, and Simon Andrews. “HiCUP: Pipeline for Mapping and Processing Hi-C Data.” F1000Research 4 (2015): 1310. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7334.1. - HiCUP pipeline, alignment only, removes artifacts (religations, duplicate reads) creating BAM files. Details about Hi-C sequencing artefacts. Used in conjunction with other pipelines. http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/hicup/
